Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Jeff
McMahon. He is Sakura and White's Professor of Moral
Philosophy at the University of Oxford. And today we're
going to talk about uh reproductive ethics and uh
within the topic of reproductive ethics, antenatalism, extinctionism, embryo
selection, population ethics, and some other related topics. So
Jeff, welcome back to the show. It's always an
immense pleasure to talk with you. Thanks,
Ricardo, and it's always a great pleasure to talk
with you. As I've said before, you must be
the the most learned person on earth, uh, with
all the topics you cover, it's just amazing.
Well, I, I, I, I mean, uh, uh, I'm
not sure about that, but I, I, I, I,
I appreciate the kind words. So, um, let me
just ask you before we get into, uh, the
actual topics, uh, because, of course, on the show,
I've already discussed with you the different kinds of
topics related to, for example, your book, The Ethics
of Kill. Killing in war, uh, we've talked about
political violence, so I mean reproductive ethics. I, I
wanted to ask you what got you interested in
the in this topic specifically, and do you think
that there's any link in terms of ethics between
these topics specifically and other topics you've explored? In
your work, because for example, we're going to talk
a little bit about abortion and we also touched
on that topic when we did our first interview
on the ethics of killing. So I mean, is
there any link at all between this topic and
some of the other topics you've explored in ethics?
Yeah, uh, sure, um. Reproductive ethics is technically, I
would say a part of bioethics, um, it concerns
obviously human reproduction, procreation, that kind of thing. It
raises a number of theoretical issues in all kinds
of areas of moral philosophy. Um, SOME of the
fundamental issues in reproductive ethics are issues in what's
called population ethics, which is the ethics of causing
people to exist and uh Um, but it also
links up with, as you know, the very a
range of practical problems that are less connected with
population ethics, for example, abortion, prenatal injury, uh, problem
of wrongful life in, in philosophy and in law.
Um, BUT then there are other practical issues like,
uh, surrogacy. Um, THAT fall within the scope of
reproductive ethics. I don't really address issues of that
sort. But then there are questions that we're going
to discuss briefly today, such as embryo selection and
gene editing and so on, which again, um, If
you pursue them deep enough, take you into uh
deep areas of uh normative ethical theory. Uh, WHAT'S
the what's the nature of our moral reasons? Are
they reasons to do what's better or worse for
people, or are our reasons impersonal in character or
whatever? And we'll probably get to some of that
at some point today.
Yes, certainly. So, um, let's start. Uh, YOU'VE already
ended up explaining actually the scope of reproductive ethics.
So, uh, getting into the first topic here, um,
what are your views on anti-natalism? Of course this
is not the only. Uh, ETHICAL theory or ethical
position out there when it comes to the ethics
of reproduction. We also have its counterpart pro-natalism, for
example, but, uh, specifically on anti-natalism. What are your
views?
Well, antenatalism is the view that All things considered,
uh, we have decisive reason not to cause new
people to exist in most cases. Um, AND I
think this view is profoundly counterintuitive, and I think
it is insufficiently supported by arguments, um. The the
vast majority of people in the world believe, rightly,
in my view, that their lives are worth living,
and consequently they fear death and they try to
do what they can to avoid it. But if
our lives are in general good and good for
us, if what's intrinsically good in our lives uh
is generally, uh, uh, significantly greater than what's intrinsically
bad, and I think that's true in most cases,
and I think we intuitively recognize that about ourselves,
then what reason is there to prevent people like
us from existing? If our lives are good and
good for us, why should we prevent them from
Coming about. Now there are arguments for anti-natalism, um.
Um And we will discuss those. I, I think
the very best argument for anti-natalism appeals to quite
common moral intuitions about causing people to exist. And
it takes some effort to resist that argument. I
don't think it's an argument that Uh, is, uh,
dominant in the literature on anti-natalism or or literature
in support of anti-natalism, but I'm not sure because
I haven't really read all of that literature. Um,
AND so I really don't know. Um, BUT my,
my view is that, uh, in order to avoid
anti-natalism, we're going to have to accept that we
have moral reasons to cause people to exist if
their lives would be worth living. And most people
don't think that that, that that's A moral imperative
or even that there's a moral reason. No, nobody
thinks that anybody's doing anything wrong if they don't
cause somebody to exist. On the other hand, I've
come to the view that, uh, if I have
to choose between believing that there are reasons to
cause well-off people to exist and believing that there
are reasons, all things considered, not to cause anybody
to exist, even if their life would be worth
living. Then, uh, I will accept the, the, the
first counterintuitive claim rather than the second.
Hm, that's very interesting. You know, there are different
kinds of arguments that anti-Natalists and anti-atalist philosophers use
to defend their position. I mean, I, I'm not
sure if we have time to explore all of
them here, but the one I'm, I'm, I'm at
least going to tell you the one I think
is the most persuasive, even just for. Uh, I
mean, uh, people in general, uh, and then, uh,
I want to hear your thoughts about it. So,
I think that the most persuasive one is the
argument, uh, or what I call the argument from
risk, which is the argument, when anti-atalists argue that
it is always a risk to bring someone new
into existence because, um, The probability of them experiencing
a lot of suffering, pain, and have bad and
have negative experiences in life is Really, really, really
high. I mean, there's a really high probability of
that happening, and uh I mean, basically every time
you reproduce or bring something, uh, someone new, a
human or even sometimes they expand the argument to
include other sentient beings into the world, your risk.
THEM having a pretty bad or even miserable life
because of those kinds of negative experiences and so
it would just be better for you to not
risk that even though perhaps people would say that
sometimes or even many times uh someone. WOULD possibly
have a life that we could consider worth living.
So what do you make of that kind of
argument?
Well, I agree, obviously that there is a risk
if one causes someone to exist, that that person
will have a life that's not worth living, that
is the intrinsically bad things in the life will
outweigh the intrinsically good things in the life. I
think statistically that risk is nowadays, uh, quite low.
You look around yourself, how many people have lives
in which what's intrinsically bad outweighs what's intrinsically good.
Um, Uh, IN, in, in, and this is life
as a whole, uh, often it happens that a
person will have a good life up to a
point, and then it happens that what's, uh, bad
begins to outweigh what's good. In that kind of
case, suicide or assistance in dying or euthanasia or
whatever is, is a possibility. Uh, IN which case
the life as a whole may well have been
very well worth living. I think the, the cases
in which a life as a whole, the whole
thing has been not worth living when it comes
to an end are quite rare. But there is
that risk and that risk has to be offset
or outweighed by something. And I think what that
something is, is the high probability that the life
will be good for the person whose life it
is. And, but that, what that means is I
think that If the good that a person will
would experience in life has a high probability of
outweighing what's bad in the life, that in itself
offsets, uh, the risk. But that commits me to
the idea, I think that we do have reason
to bring about what is good for people by
causing people to exist. So I've come to accept.
That claim, which I think most people find counterintuitive,
it runs, it directly contradicts the view in population
ethics that most people have tried to defend, which
in an article in 1981 I called the asymmetry,
and that's the view that while there is a
reason not to cause someone to exist if that
person's life would not be worth living. There's no
reason to cause a person to exist just because
the person's life would be worth living. So I
now reject the second of those two claims on
the, on, for various reasons. Um, ONE is that
I just find those 22 claims in tension with
one another. It's hard to defend both of them.
And so this has been a persistent problem in
population ethics trying to defend this procreative asymmetry or
procreation asymmetry as uh Johann Frick has called it.
Um, And I think that's because, you know, the
best explanation. OF why it's wrong to cause a
person to exist if there's a high probability that
that person's life would not be worth living, is
that There's a high probability of doing what would
be bad for that person. The explanation of why
we have this reason is that if we bring
a person into existence whose life contains, for example,
almost nothing but suffering, what we've done is bad
for that person. Now in my view, it's not
worse for that person because worse is comparative, and
that implies that it would be better for that
person never to exist. But in my view, um,
never existing can't be better or worse for anybody
because there is no one who never exists. Uh,
SO, uh, but I still think that it's bad
for somebody, but if it's bad for somebody to
come into existence with a life that's not worth
living, then it must be good for someone to
come into existence with a life that is worth
living. And if we have a reason not to
do what's bad for someone, then we should have
some reason, even if it's a weaker reason. To
do what would be good for a person, though
it wouldn't be better for that person, by causing
that person to exist with a high probability of
having a life worth living, and what that means
is that we have this reason to do what's
good for people in this way, and I think
that's what outweighs the risk of causing somebody to
exist whose life would not be worth living. Um
Yeah, I, I understand, but I think that there's
a very big, big question here that we have
to address, particularly for people who will be watching
or listening to this interview. I mean, how do
we determine if a particular life will be worth
living? I mean, I'm, I'm asking you beforehand. I
mean before we create that. In this case, uh,
we're focusing mostly on humans, that human life, because,
uh, let's say for example that someone would be
born into a very wealthy family with, with lots
of opportunities or different kinds of opportunities in life
and so on, and they would never suffer from
material deprivation. I mean, there's still the risk that
that person could suffer from a debilitating mental condition
like I, I don't know, depression or schizophrenia or
something like that, and they would still have a
miserable life and also, I mean, Someone could be
born into extreme poverty and I don't know, through
their own efforts in some way be able to
live those kinds of circumstances and actually have a
life that He or she, him or herself would
consider uh worth living even though at the very
beginning they would have experienced those kinds of very
dire circumstances. So is it possible to tell before
the fact whether someone's life would be worth living?
No, not with any certainty. Um, AS I said
before, we have to be guided here by probabilities,
um, and, you know, statistics. So you just Look
around yourself, go to various parts of the world,
even in very poor areas. Are the people in
those poor areas committing suicide? No. Most of them
find their lives well worth living, even if they
are materially deprived. Um, DO they, want not to
have children, no, they would like to have children
and they're very distressed if the conditions of poverty,
uh, are harmful to their children. Um, SO as
I say, it's just a, it's a matter of
probability. Now, I should concede that I do think
that Whether a life is worth living for the
person who lives it is in my view an
objective matter. We can be wrong about this. Um,
THIS is not a matter of, uh, uh, a
subjective matter. Um, SO there are a lot of
people, I think, who believe that their lives are
not worth living, which involves projection into the future
of what their life is going to be like.
WHO are mistaken about this. They are temporarily depressed
or whatever, and some, a lot of people I
think kill themselves when their lives would actually have
been worth living had they continued. Um, I also
think they're probably lives, um, that people believe are
worth living for them, um, but are not. They're,
they're, they're insufficiently good human lives in certain Ways.
So for example, I think that however sort of
happy Hitler was and, uh, however well satisfied his
desires were and so on, he did not have
a life that was worth living for a human
being. It would have been better for Hitler himself,
and I'm not talking about his victims now, but
just Hitler. It would have been better for Hitler
himself to have died rather than lived that kind
of human life. So, uh, This is, this is
something that we can be wrong about. On the
other hand, I think it would be very strange
if we were all systematically deluded, and in fact,
all, all of us who think that our lives
are well worth living are somehow mistaken about this.
That would be that that requires a lot of
argument. It requires, uh, uh, it would require a
very peculiar, um, Understanding of well-being.
Oh, OK, but, um, let me just, uh, uh,
try to push back a little bit on, uh,
when you say that, uh, we can evaluate that,
uh, a life is worth living objectively. I mean,
isn't there at least somewhat of a subjective element
when it comes to evaluating that in the sense
that for example, different people have different personality traits,
have different psychological predispositions, different temperaments, and they would
evaluate themselves. The similar kinds of experiences in different
ways. Perhaps someone would evaluate a particular kind of
experience as positive, and at the same time, a
different person would evaluate that exact same experience as
negative and so on. So I mean what I'm
trying to suggest here. Is that um we have
our own set of psychological mechanisms and different people
evaluate the same kind of experiences and information in
different ways depending on their personality traits, temperament, and
so on. So, I mean, shouldn't we at least
uh take that into account that there's Some, at
least to a certain extent, a subjective element when
it comes to that kind of evaluation of whether
a particular life is worth living or not.
Yeah, I, what you're saying I think is, is,
is entirely correct, I don't think I would use
the word subjective to describe it. What I would
say is that objectively, uh, we should be pluralists
about the good. OK, that is, um, given that
people differ in their natures in various ways, um,
what is good for one person might not necessarily
be good for another, and what that means is
that Uh, goodness for a person is often in
some way or other relativized to that person's nature
and psychology and and so on. And maybe even
to that person's autonomous choices and so on, but
the, but it's not that what's good for them
is determined by what they believe is what's good
for them. Um, WHAT'S good for them is determined
by their nature and a Uh, uh, uh, uh,
an acceptable theory of well-being. Now, I'm a pluralist
about all of this. I think that, um, There
are many dimensions to well-being. Some people are hedonists,
some people are desire or preference satisfaction theorists, other
people are objective list theorists. I'm an objective list
theorist, but I think that hedonism is an important,
uh, element on the objective list and maybe desire
satisfaction as well. Um, AND I think there's actually
more to A good life for a person than
well-being. And I think, for example, just to me,
the most prominent example of that is being a
morally good person. I think it it it it
is good for a person to be morally good
and to act morally, and it makes that person's
life worse for that person. If the person acts
wrongly or wickedly or whatever, and this is, that's
part of what I was trying to communicate when
I mentioned Hitler as an example of somebody who
I believe had an objectively bad life, and that's
compatible with his maybe having a high level of
well-being according to many theories of well-being or whatever.
Uh, THE reason I think being a moral person
has to be a distinct dimension of a good
life for a person. Is that otherwise we might
not be able to understand that. A person can
sacrifice his or her well-being for the sake of
being a moral person, and that may make the
person's life all things considered better for that person,
even though it lowers the person's well-being.
Right, right, no, no, I, I understand your, your
position there. So, uh, before we move on to
other topics, let me just ask you this because
I think that, uh, even anti-Natalists themselves will appreciate
us discussing this. Specific topic also to help perhaps
clarify some of their positions and so on. So
when it comes to approaching anti-atalism, do you think
that the better way of doing it is to
claim that there are, there are reasons not to
cause individuals to exist? Or that there is no
reason to cause individuals to exist. I mean, because
those are, even though they might seem very similar,
the, the, on the one hand that there are
reasons not to cause individuals to exist in, to
exist on the other end, there is no reason
to cause individuals to exist. They are slightly different,
right? So which do you think is the better
approach?
Uh, I think the second approach is by far
the better approach, in part for the reasons that
I've given, I think in most people's lives are
worth living, good for them. Um, If you say
that there is a positive reason not to cause
a person to exist, even if that person's life
would be worth living and good for that person,
that view is very difficult to defend. I think
most people actually do believe that there's no moral
reason to cause a person to exist just because
that person's life would be worth living. That's, as
I mentioned before, one half of this, uh, claim
called the asymmetry in population ethics, that, that is,
I think the common sense view. And I do
think that, um, combined with the idea, the other
part of the asymmetry that we have reason not
to cause people to exist if their lives would
be bad for them, and we have reason not
to risk causing people to exist because their lives
would be bad for them. Um, THOSE two views
together, um, may very well entail anti-natalism. So I
think that the best argument for anti-natalism, uh, does
invoke the idea that there is no reason to
cause a person to exist just because the person's
life would be worth living. The reason I think
that the first argument is a bad one, well,
they're quite a lot. Um, QUITE a lot of,
uh, reasons why I think the claim is a
bad one. I've already explained that I think it's,
uh, it just doesn't make sense to say that
it's, that it's bad and that we have reason,
uh, uh, sorry, it's bad to cause somebody to
exist whose life would be worth living and we
have reason not to do that. The, that in
itself is, uh, counterintuitive, um. We can think about
uh this argument that we have reason not to
cause people to exist, even if their lives would
be worth living, is based on a variety of
arguments. I mean, the most famous argument I think
is they found that the early argument of David
Benatar, who is probably the best known of the
anti-natalists, um, and you, you interviewed him
fairly several times.
Yeah, OK. Well, um, David is a friend of
mine. I think he's a wonderful person and I'm
glad he exists. I'm glad his parents decided to
have children.
Well, maybe you would say that you would have
preferred to not have existed. Yeah, I mean, I'm
not sure. I'm not sure if you would say
that, but
Well, he distinguishes between, uh, reason, reasons to, reasons
for causing people to exist and reasons for continuing
to exist. But, um, and I think he thinks
he's got reasons to continue to exist, but it
would have been better if he had never come
into existence. But, um, his basic argument appeals to
uh uh an asymmetry, and what he says here
is this, that If we don't cause someone to
exist whose life would have been worth living. Um,
THERE'S, uh, no one we've prevented from having something
good. This person never exists, and so, um, Uh,
the absence of that happiness is not good. Because
there's nobody for whom it's good. But he says
that if we don't cause someone to exist whose
life would have been full of suffering, that is
good. The absence of suffering because there's no one
who's suffering, it is good, but the absence of
happiness because there's no one who's missing out on
it is bad. He makes that claim. But I
think that claim is Without good foundation, and it
has all kinds of bizarre entailments. So for example,
if you think the absence of happiness. Um, It
is not bad. Let me, let me think about
this for a minute. Um, mhm,
uh, NO, yeah, I, I, I, I understand your
struggle there because I've also been struggling with, uh,
David Bennett, the, uh, David Bennettar's symmetry argument for,
uh, a long time. So, and particularly that bit
about. OK, someone not experiencing happiness or pleasure because
he or she never existed in the first place
is not bad because they're not missing out on
that, OK, but then there's no one there to
begin with, so it's, it's really a weird argument.
So
let me, let me explain. I, I think they
are. Any number of reasons why that argument fails.
One is this, he says, It's good If someone
who would have suffered doesn't come into existence, the
absence of suffering is good. Well, if that's true,
then the world is infinitely good, because of the
infinite number of people who could exist. And suffer,
but who don't. And this is true even after
human extinction, even after extinction, if there were no
life in the universe whatsoever, the universe would be
infinitely good because it would, uh, it would be
good because of the absence of all that suffering
that could have occurred. And that seems to me
crazy to say that, you know, a, a, a,
a totally lifeless world, uh, is infinitely good because
it doesn't contain all the suffering it could have
contained. Um, THERE'S also this question of the, the,
uh, Explaining the asymmetry here, um, if the reason
why, um, The absence of happiness is not good,
is that there's no one who's been deprived of
it, then the same claim should be true about
the absence of suffering, because there's no one who's
been spared from it. If I don't cause a
miserable person to exist, there's no one I've spared
from suffering. So the, the basic claim seems to
apply uh symmetrically here. And finally, one of the
arguments that I have made in print against David's
view is this. He's saying it's bad to cause
suffering by causing someone to exist, but not good
to cause happiness by causing somebody to exist. So
suppose that one has, suppose that whatever one does,
a person is going to come into existence. There's
no way to prevent that. But one can choose
which of two possible people will be the one
who comes into existence. If one chooses one way,
a person will come into existence whose life will
have a little bit of suffering in it. But
not much And overall, there will be more well-being
in this life than in any human life that's
ever been lived. It's, you know, better than any
life that any human being has ever lived, because
that's one possibility. The other possibility is that you
can choose that a different person will come into
existence, whose life would have even less suffering in
it than the first life, but it would have
no positive well-being at all. So, it would be
neutral for most of the time and have some
suffering, but less suffering. So that life would be
not worth living because there'd be nothing good in
it, but there would be some suffering. On Minotaur's
view, I ought to bring that second life into
existence because all that matters is the minimization of
the amount of suffering. So if I can choose
between bringing about, you know, and, and I can't
make it the case that there'll be nobody who
comes into this. Somebody's going to come into existence.
It will either be a person with the best
life that's ever been lived or somebody who has
a life that's not worth living, and I ought
to choose on Benatar's view, the second life. And
I can't believe that
Mhm. OK, so, uh, I would like to move
on now to another topic. Uh, LET'S talk a
little bit about the ethics of abortion specifically. I
mean, just to, uh, go back, uh, a little
bit to the, when I asked you before how
we determine or how we evaluate whether a life
is worth living or not. Do you think that
Uh, that kind of, uh, evaluation should also play
a role in the ethics of abortion, or is
abortion a topic that you approach ethically, uh, through
other perspectives or other kinds. Of arguments like for
example, based on women's bodily autonomy, which is something
that many times, uh, pro-choice, uh, fem pro-choice people,
feminists, and so on appeal to, uh, I mean,
what do, do you think that we should also,
or, or that, um, discussing or determining whether life
is worth living or not should also play a
role in the ethics of abortion or not.
Uh, YEAH, but I think it, it, it has
quite a minor role. That is to say, if
a woman is pregnant and discovers that Uh, the
fetus she's carrying will develop into someone whose life
will be not worth living, full of suffering and
so on. Then I do think she has a
positive moral reason to have an abortion. It's uh,
it would be a form of non-voluntary euthanasia, you'd
be, uh, you know, there's no question of the
fetus having autonomy or being able to consent or
whatever, but if, uh, if it's reasonable to believe
that The life that the subsequent person would have
would be a really dreadful life, then yes, we
have reason to prevent that. Um, I think most
cases of abortion. Depend crucially on um First of
all, questions about personal identity, and secondly, questions about
interests or what, you know, what, what matters in
a, in a life, uh, but, but specifically about
uh whether fetuses are would be one and the
same individuals as a later person, and secondly, whether
the fetus has an interest and if so, of
what strength in continuing to live and becoming an
adult person. And thirdly, um, do fetuses have some
kind of moral status or not? I think by
and large the morality of abortion is determined. With
reference to three types of consideration. One is personal
identity, the other is interests, and the third is
moral status. I can explain each of those. Um,
THE first one about identity is a question about
when we begin to exist. Um, DIFFERENT people have
different views about this, uh, some, a lot of
people, I think probably most people believe we begin
to exist at conception. Uh, FOR a variety of
reasons, I don't think that's plausible. Uh, SOME people's
views about personal identity imply that we don't actually
even begin to exist until normally until after birth.
I think that's implausible as well. My view is
that we begin to exist when the capacity for
consciousness arises in the developing fetus, and that happens
sometime between about 22 and 28 weeks after conception.
So what that means is that before that point,
On my view, there's nobody there, there's nobody there
who loses a good life, there's just an empty
developing fetal organism, and you know, that's clearest when
there's just a single-celled zygote immediately following conception. Could
I exist as a single-celled non-conscious entity? No. Um,
SECOND consideration is interests, um, Does the fetus have
a strong interest in continuing to live? And in
my view, um, interests are, uh, a function of
two considerations. One is the amount of good or
that one could have or the amount of bad
one would avoid, and then the strength of the
psychological connections between oneself at the present time and
oneself in the future. And the fetus is totally
psychologically unconnected with itself in the future, even after
it becomes one of us. So a 30 week
old fetus, I think I existed as a 30
week old fetus because there was a conscious being
there then, and that conscious being didn't go out
of existence and me come into existence. I was
that conscious being. But did I then have any
strong interests when I had no self-consciousness, no knowledge
of myself as a continuing being over time, and
no hopes, no fears, no desires, no beliefs, um,
and I now have no memories. And so I
think in the absence of those psychological connections, the
interest that a fetus has in it, in its
own future life is very, very weak. And finally
I think, uh, fetuses. Clearly just lack the capacities,
whatever they might be, that are the basis of
the moral status of a person like you or
me. We don't, uh, if we don't think, I
mean, A fetus has lower psychological and moral capacities
than a mouse. If we don't think a mouse
has the same moral status that we have, how
could we think that a, a, a, a conscious,
but barely conscious human fetus does. So I think,
um, early abortions which kill uh uh uh developing
human organism before one of us begins to exist
in association with it. They are always permissible. They
don't, there's nobody there. There's nobody there who's harmed.
Uh, LATER abortions, uh, there is somebody there, but
that individual's interest in continuing to live is very
weak, so the harm done to that individual is
very, very slight. And finally, I just don't think
fetuses have the kind of moral status that requires
respect for them as individuals, as beings who matter
highly for their own sake. And so I think,
um, While there's a presumption, uh, a weak presumption
against the permissibility of late term abortion, I think
it's easily overridden by the kind of concerns you
mentioned, uh, that, uh, feminists and others call attention
to, um.
Mhm. Uh, BUT, but I mean, let me just
clarify this point because based on your first criterion,
uh, related to personal identity, I mean, you mentioned
that, uh, time frame between the 22nd and the
28th, uh, 28th week. Uh, I mean, do you
think that, uh, because, uh, in that time frame,
fetuses acquire, or at least according to the best
knowledge we have, they acquire consciousness and other psychological
traits. Do you think that that would be sufficient
to say that abortion is immoral after the 22nd
or at the latest the 28th week?
No, for the, for the other reasons I gave,
at some point during that period, a new individual
comes into existence. That individual will be identical with
a later person if it continues to live. But
as I said, I think that individual has only
very, very weak interests and therefore, would not be
significantly harmed by being killed. Now, it may be
true that a very, very, very elderly person who's
got only a couple of days left to live
would also not be significantly harmed by being killed.
On the other hand, That very elderly person has
a kind of moral status that would make it
wrong for us to kill that person without her
consent, even though her interests are weak, and I'm
denying that fetuses have that kind of moral status
either. So, no, I don't think abortion becomes wrong,
uh. Uh, IN any significant way after the 22nd
or 28th week after conception.
Oh, OK, so, uh, one more question then about
abortion. What do you make then, uh, about, uh,
what do you make of the argument based on
women's bodily autonomy? I mean, how much weight do
you think it has or would have ethically in
regards to abortion?
Uh, I would attribute less weight to that than,
uh, just on its own than many philosophers do.
I think that if a fetus had the same,
if a fetus were, for example, had the same
moral status that you and I have. Um, I
think that there would be a strong moral presumption
against killing it. Now I don't, I mean, for
it to have the same moral status that you
and I have, it would have to be self-conscious
and rational and autonomous or whatever. And, but, uh,
what I'm saying is that if you imagine the,
uh, pregnant person's bodily autonomy rights and so on
as overriding. Um, Even on the assumption that the
fetus has a high moral status, I think that
that's Uh, not plausible because what we have to
imagine is you imagine the fetus being a kind
of self-conscious, rational, autonomous individual who happens to find
itself through no fault of its own and no
responsibility of its own inside somebody else's body, um.
And in most cases, uh, you know, the only
person who, who, who, the only two people who've
had any choice about the existence of this, uh,
person are the, are the pregnant person and her
partner. Um, SO, uh, I just, I, I can't
see that these arguments on their own are sufficient
to show that abortion is permissible. They Work together
with the arguments that I have given about personal
identity, strength of interest, and moral status, I think
to overdetermine the permissibility of abortion in almost all
cases. But by themselves. I don't think that they
are sufficient to justify abortion.
OK, so, um, I mean, we talked about anti-natalism
a few minutes ago. There are anti-Nalists, not all
of them, and we're going to touch on that
point, there, but there are anti-atalists who are also
extinctionists. So, um, I mean, first of all, how
do you approach extinctionism from An ethical perspective. What
do you think are the questions that we should
consider here when evaluating or determining whether human beings
going extinct would be good or bad, and I
mean it would be good or bad for I
mean, whatever I don't know, for the world, for
other species, for the universe, I, we also have
to determine for whom it would be good or
bad, right? But I mean, how do you approach
that?
OK, um, well, You're using the term extinctionism and
you've implicitly defined it. I think it's the view
that human extinction would, other things being equal, be
a good thing. I do think that that claim
is implied by anti-natalism, that it would be a
good thing. Uh, OTHER things being equal. Now, even
anti-natalists can recognize that there are reasons why human
extinction would be bad. Um, Samuel Scheffler has a
couple of books, uh, that Explore in great detail
the ways in which extinction would be bad for
existing people, the people who existed at the time
and possibly even for people who existed in the
past. I mean, he points out, for example, that
much of what we do and much of what
gives meaning to our lives. Depends on our sense
that what we are doing is contributing to some
ongoing project that will continue after we have ceased
to exist. Philosophers, for example, and scientists and others
think about what they're doing in this way. Um,
I'm never gonna solve. CONCLUSIVELY any problem in moral
or political philosophy, but I'm contributing to a a
a continuing effort to uh uh uh achieve greater
understanding of these matters. And so it's important to
me and what I do to have the belief
that people are going to come after me and
continue what I'm working to try to achieve. Sam
Scheffler also points out that we expect future generations
to be continuous of our values, our culture, all
these things that matter to us. So if human
extinction were going to occur, that would be, that
would frustrate strong interests that almost everybody existing at
the time has, and maybe it would frustrate interests
of people in the past if there can be
posthumous interest, because people in the past are like
us and in in that much of the meaning
in their lives was derived from the sense that
What mattered to them was going to continue after
they ceased to exist. Um, SO we can all
agree that these are reasons why extinction, uh, would
be bad, um. There are also people, they are
also interests that people have in having children. Um,
THIS is something that we are evolutionarily determined, most
of us, to have at least some pre predisposition
to desire. We, we desire to have children, we
find parenting very rewarding, and Uh, Human extinction might,
you know, uh, prevent that if, if extinction were
to occur quite suddenly, it would involve the premature
deaths of everyone alive, and that would be quite
terrible. So there are all these reasons, but I
think what, um, what the anti-natalists, uh, I think
is that extinction would be good if it came
about voluntarily. If we could bring it about voluntarily,
um, A long time ago in a book published
in 1977, Jonathan Glover had a hypothetical example, a
thought experiment in which he said, suppose there were
a pill that we could take, and this pill
would enable us to live for much longer than
we live, you know, maybe I'm just making this
up, but let's say we could live for 3,
each of us could live for 300 years, we
could have lives without disease. Um, WITHOUT mental illness
of any kind, um, and without a physical degeneration
through aging, we would, we would remain young and
vigorous physically and so on and so forth. And
we would be very happy. This pill would make
us all incredibly happy. So it would be in
every person's interest to take this pill. And that
would, uh, eventually, but, but the, but the side
effect of the pill is that it causes, um,
uh, uh, sterility and inability to To, uh, uh,
produce children and put aside the science that might
enable us to cause human beings to exist without
sexual relations among between people let's put that possibility
aside. So if everybody took this pill, extinction would
occur. That would be the ideal kind of, um,
case for the anti-natalist. Um, Glover presented this thought
experiment. To try to show that even if extinction
would be good for every existing person, our intuition
is still that it would be a terribly bad
thing. Um, AND what one could say here is
that it would be bad impersonally. Um, THAT'S what
some people say. So notably, for example, Johann Frick
argues that human extinction would involve the disappearance of
collectives that are impersonally valuable, cultures, civilizations, even the
human species as a whole, this is something that
is in itself impersonally valuable. And uh, he thinks
that's one moral reason why extinction would be, would
be bad. And um, I agree with that to
a certain extent, but I think in my view,
the reason why extinction would be bad is that
it would prevent An indefinitely large number of people
from having what would be good for them. In
the same way, it would be really terrible if
a huge number of people came into existence whose
lives were full of suffering and utterly miserable, that
would be bad for them. We have reason to
prevent that. But by parity of reasoning. Having a
life that's worth living is good for that person,
and we have reasons to do what would benefit
people in this way, giving them lives that are
good for them. Um, SO I think when we
have children who go on to have lives that
are worth living, we have done something, uh, that
we had moral reason to do. We have brought
into the world. A being for whom existence is
good, a being with a certain kind of status,
a being that matters for its own sake or
his or her own sake or whatever, and so
I, I do think that Anti-extinctionism. Has to be
closely connected with pro-natalism. And I have over the
course of my philosophical career, become a kind of
weak pro-natalist. For that reason, there's reasons of consistency.
00, OK, OK, OK. Perhaps we will have time
to explore that aspect of your philosophy more in
more detail later, but, um, what do you make
of when people argue against extinctionism, but for, from
a more cosmic perspective, let's say, and they say
that. It it would be bad not only for
humans themselves but but even for the universe itself,
for their, uh, if there were no humans, er.
If no humans existed because the universe, because there
wouldn't even be, I mean, unless of course there
are other intelligent species out there somewhere which we
don't know of, but I mean assuming just for
the sake of the argument that we are the
only. Uh, INTELLIGENT, human-like species, uh, in the universe.
I mean, that if we didn't exist, uh, there
would be no, I don't know, no, uh, they
use different kinds of examples, no art, no poetry,
no science, no knowledge at all, no culture, no
civilization. Um, NO, uh, higher forms of, um, I
don't know, uh, pleasure, pleasurable experiences and so on
in the universe, and so that would be bad,
uh, because the, the universe wouldn't contain those kinds
of beings. I, I mean, what do you make
of, uh, an argument, uh. Proposed on an argument
like that.
I, I, I find that, uh, completely persuasive. It's
roughly what I had in mind when I said
that, um, The extinction of the human species would,
uh, result in the loss of things that are
valuable impersonally, not because they're good or bad for
anyone, but just because the existence of these things
is good or valuable in itself. Um, BUT I,
but I think it's There's a distinction between What's
good impersonally, not good or bad for anybody, but
just good. Um, AND what's good for individuals. And
I think it's much more cogent to me to
say that the reason to prevent extinction is that
we would be enabling There to be in the
world much that is good for the individuals who
exist in that world. We're doing it for. We're
doing what's good for individuals and not just what's
good impersonally, but I do think that the impersonal,
uh, claims are themselves plausible. They're not mutually exclusive.
They, they, they, to some extent are extensionally equivalent,
um, they're just different ways of understanding in what
way it's good. So when Johann Frick says, The
human species is itself something of great value or
the the cult, a particular culture or civilization is
something of great value. He's saying that these, these
are valuable, not because they're instrumental to something else,
but they are just good in themselves, impersonally good.
And I, I, I find that plausible, but I
would rather articulate my own view in terms of
what's good for individuals.
Right. OK, but what do you make of the
fact, I mean, I, I'm, I'm curious whether this,
I guess we can call it a fact. I
mean, I'm going to explore it further, but, uh,
I, I'm curious as to whether something like this,
uh, makes you pause for a bit when it
comes to Uh, looking at the future and our
prospects as a species, because, I mean, isn't it.
Just inevitable that somewhere in the future it doesn't
matter if it's in, I don't know, 100 years
because of climate catastrophe or in thousands of years
or even in billions of years or trillions of
years if we just be if we're just able
to survive until the point where the universe. At
least according to physicists' predictions, is no longer able
to sustain life. I mean, isn't it just inevitable
or even from a biological perspective that eventually Homo
sapiens will evolve into other species? And of course
we can discuss whether those species would still be
humans or Not or that we could consider them
the same or attribute to them the same kind
of value that we attribute to our species, but
I mean, isn't it inevitable that somewhere in the
future, it doesn't matter how long it takes, we
will just go extinct, and I mean, I mean,
keeping that in mind. I, I mean, does it,
uh, affect in any way the way you think
about, uh, the possibility of our extinction and what
would be lost from us going extinct?
Um, Not really, um, two points, uh, occurred to
me. The first is the analogy with an individual
life. Um, YEAH, I'm gonna die at some point.
Um, I'd rather it be 30 years from now
than later this afternoon. Um, THAT'S gonna be better.
There'll be a lot more what's good for me
if I can continue to live for a certain
period of time. Same thing is true of human
beings as, as a whole. Uh, THE, the longer
there can be conscious beings who have well-being and
whose lives are good for them, um, the better.
Um Second point, there's nothing sacrosanct in my understanding
about the human species. If human beings go on
to evolve, uh, into something higher, if we, you
know, uh, we are superior now, I think, um,
in various ways, uh, to our remotest ancestors in,
in, in evolution. And that's good. And if we
evolve in ways that give us a higher capacity
for well-being, um, make us morally better, uh, beings
than we are now, and we, and those people
want those individuals, persons, whatever they would be, supra
persons or whatever. Um, JUDGED that they constituted a
different species, which is, these, these are just ways
of classifying things anyway. It wouldn't make any difference
at all. Um, I, I myself agree with uh
the people who think that, um, Genetic enhancement of
human beings would be a good thing. Um, IF
we could, uh, somehow transcend. The Really cruel and
barbaric nature that um it lies within most of
us and emerge and is emerging in places like
Ukraine and Gaza and Iran with all the wars
and unspeakable cruelty that people and and unutterable stupidity.
Of the leaders who are bringing this about. If
we could evolve beyond that, or through genetic enhancement,
make our progeny morally and, and, uh, spiritually superior
to the way we are now, that would be
really good. And if we could also have a,
you know, have a higher capacity for well-being. Um,
YOU and I have a higher capacity for well-being
than a squirrel does. There are all kinds of
dimensions of well-being that are accessible to us that
are inaccessible to a squirrel, and it's entirely possible,
though we can't really imagine what it would be
like, uh, entirely possible that our progeny, our successors
could Have higher psychological capacities and a higher capacity
for well-being than we have, so they could have
lives that would be much better for them than
our lives are for us. And if we could
bring that about through some kind of genetic uh
uh uh uh. Engineering, that would be a good,
good thing.
Oh, OK, so I think that makes for a
great segue into our next topic because I wanted
to ask you also about the ethics of gene
editing and embryo selection. I mean, in recent times
with the rise of technology that allows for people
to do that, I mean in terms of gene
editing. Uh, IT'S still very incipient, let's say, I,
I don't know to what extent or if we
are already able to use gene editing in many
meaningful ways, at least in humans, but um, how
do you approach these two topics, gene editing and
embryo selection, ethically?
Um, At present. Most people who are working on
these possibilities think of them primarily as ways of
Avoiding bad conditions. So, embryo selection is usually done
to enable potential parents to have a child who
will not have some inherited genetic condition that uh
constitutes an impairment or a disadvantage. Um. Gene editing
is, is thought of as having pretty much the
same use, trying to eliminate genes that would be
harmful. Um, As I said a moment ago, I,
uh, I think that these technologies could also be
used for the enhancement of uh our progeny, making
our progeny better off than than we are. Um,
THE one important difference between Or well, at present,
two important differences between, uh, gene editing and embryo
selection. One is that gene editing is typically better
for the person who develops from the edited embryo.
That is, it's, unless the editing is so radical
that it changes the identity of the person who
it makes it the case that a different person
comes to exist from the one who would have
existed had the editing not been done. If that's
not the case, then the choices between one and
the same person having, for example, some uh disadvantageous
condition and that very same person not having that
disadvantageous condition. So the gene editing is actually better
for somebody. And some of us think that that
matters morally. Um, THAT'S why, for example, I think
saving somebody's life is better than causing somebody with
a, with a happy life to exist. If I,
if I, if I bring a happy person into
existence, I'm doing what's good for somebody, but not
what's better for that person. Because I, as I
said earlier, the alternative is that they never exist.
But um, If we, if we engage in gene
editing, we're doing what's actually better for somebody. And
As I said, if, if my reason to save
somebody's life is stronger than my reason to cause
somebody to exist, I think that's because the reason
to do what's better for somebody is stronger than
the reason to do what's merely good but not
better for someone. That's a kind of complicated point,
but it is a, it is a feature of,
uh, gene editing that is absent from embryo selection.
So if we select one embryo rather than another,
we're simply bringing one person into existence rather than
a completely different person. And the person we bring
into existence is not better off. For our, for
anything that we've done, it's just that this person
exists rather than never exists. Um, AND these, you
know, these are different types of moral reason to
do what's better for somebody and to do what's
merely good for somebody, or to do what's only
impersonally good, there are these three types of reasons.
Um, AND my view is that reasons to do
what's better for individuals and not to do what's
worse for individuals. Those reasons tend to be stronger
than, for example, impersonal reasons or reasons to do
what's merely good or reasons perhaps not to do
what's merely bad. Do you think that, sorry, sorry,
Ricardo, there was one, I said two things, 22
important differences between embryo selection and gene editing. The
other one is that at present at least, uh,
uh, uh, gene editing is riskier than embryo selection,
because gene editing involves the risk of causing, uh,
some undetected bad mutation, um, and actually ending up
doing what's worse for someone. And so that's, that's
a reason to prefer embryo selection, and you might
think it's a reason to prefer gene selection that
if it succeeds, it's actually there's somebody for whom
what one has done is better.
Mhm. No, no, yeah, that's definitely true. I know
this because I've had conversations on the show with
scientists, with, for example, neuroscientists and behavioral geneticists who
told me that even, for example, the idea of
editing. A few genes to potentially increase the future
IQ of the individual by, I don't know, 12345
points. I mean that's at this point unrealistic for
different reasons. I mean one of them being that
Uh, at least as far as you, as we
know, there are thousands of different genes that contribute
to intelligence, to IQ, uh, and so I mean
to increase IQ in any meaningful way, you would
have to, uh, tweak many different genes, and the
second reason being, being that because, uh, the same
genes can participate in different processes. There's a very.
High risk that by um editing some of those
genes that are associated with intelligence, you could increase
the risk of the person developing a neurological disease
or something like that. So I mean there are
different scientific, scientifically based reasons for it being risky,
very risky at this point in time at least,
but I mean related to that, I would like
to ask you, do you think that Or to
what extent do you think we should worry about
people using embryo selection or gene editing for eugenicist
purposes, because, I mean, it's a very unfortunate thing,
but we have to take that into account because
unfortunately there are some people out there who are
eugenicists or who defend a eugenicist like. Agenda when
it comes to genetics and to these kinds of
technologies. So to what extent do you think we
should worry about these technologies being misused for eugenicist
purposes?
Uh Well, obviously. There's always. That worry, um, a
lot depends on what the eugenicist aims are and
what the Uh, political means of trying to achieve
them are, and part of the reason that eugenics
has such a bad name now is that in
the past, It was used to try to modify
to to try to achieve. Characteristics in a population
that were actually not in any way valuable, and
to do this by coercive or violent means. And
so, you know, the history of eugenics is quite
awful. Um, IN particular when it is sort of
politically mandated, but that's quite different from Uh, making
certain, uh, gene editing options available to individuals for
voluntary acceptance. So, Uh, we might offer potential parents,
uh, the possibility of some kind of genetic modification
that would enable their child to have a higher
level, a better life in some way or other.
And if it was genuinely a better life objectively,
um, why not? Uh. Um, I think, um, that,
uh, I, I, I'm gonna start over again. Uh,
I find appealing the idea, uh, uh, that is
advocated by Ingmar Prison and Julian Savulescu in a
book called Unfit for Humanity or something like that,
um, that Some forms of genetic moral enhancement would
be really highly desirable if, if we could, uh,
somehow or through genetic, uh, gene editing or genetic
modification. Begin to produce human beings who had Higher,
a higher capacity for empathy. That would be desirable.
Now. Would I want that to be coercively enforced
by the government? No, but it should be, I
don't see any objection to, uh, enabling potential parents
to have uh, a genetic modification that would raise
the probability that their child would be more empathetic
or more altruistic. Or whatever, and similarly with whatever
is the basis in our psychological capacities for our
capacity for well-being. If we could produce people who
would have a higher capacity for well-being, and as
I said earlier, in the way that we have
a higher capacity for well-being than a squirrel does,
if we could enhance our capacity for well-being in
some way, that would be desirable. Now would that
be eugenics? I don't, you know, I don't know,
in some technical sense, probably yes, but I don't
think it would be pernicious eugenics.
OK, but when you say that, uh, certain, I
don't know, um, approaches or gene editing, uh, I,
I mean, if there's somewhere in the future the
possibility of editing a few genes to for the
purposes of moral enhancement or enhancing well-being, something like
that, I mean, the aspect of accessibility, don't you
think that that's particularly important? Even more so, even
more so if we live as we do now
in unequal societies, because it could possibly make it
more accessible for people with more resources and less
accessible, accessible or not accessible at all for people
with less resources and, and thus it could potentially
even further increase inequality.
Yeah, I accept that completely, that uh for this
kind of genetic modification or whatever to be morally
acceptable, it would have to be uh available on
some kind of egalitarian basis, uh, definitely. Yeah, the,
the, the, the, the potential for Um, exacerbation of
inequality there is, is very great. I mean, not
necessarily with, let's say a um, A form of
genetic modification that would enhance empathy. Um, IF only
the rich got that, what that would mean maybe
is that, uh, rich people's children would become more
egalitarian than they are now. Uh,
THEY would be willing to pay higher taxes,
something like that, or they would have greater sympathy
for those who are less well off than they
are. Um. Yeah, if only, if only we could
have slipped this uh genetic modification into the, the,
um, gamuttes of, uh, uh, you know, Donald Trump
and all of his billionaire pals, and they could
have had children who were better human beings than
they are. Um, THAT would have been a good
thing.
Yes. So, uh, to get into the last topic
of our conversation, of course, you've already touched on
it, uh, at least a few times during our
conversation, but what kinds of questions interest you when
it comes to population ethics specifically?
Well, uh, There There are theoretical problems here, um,
they have, they have names, I've mentioned what uh,
what I called the asymmetry, what Johann Frick calls
the procreation asymmetry, um, That's common sense, but I
don't believe ultimately it's defensible, so, uh, I've been
trying to develop arguments for what I call a
weak asymmetry, um, which says that there are reasons
to cause people to exist, just because those people
would be well off or have lives that would
be well worth living. But those reasons are weaker
than reasons not to cause people to exist whose
lives would be miserable. So there's a kind of
asymmetry between harm and benefit here, and that has
to be defended in some way or other. There's
also what Derek Parfitt calls the non-identity problem, which
is a huge problem in practical ethics, but is,
is one of the central problems of population ethics,
which is that sometimes when we act in a
way that brings about a bad effect, Um, That
act is also a necessary condition for the existence
of the person in whose life the bad effect
occurs, so that overall, our doing this act would
not be worse for this person or even bad
for this person. But we've brought about a bad
effect because we could have caused a different person
to exist, whose life would not have contained the
bad effect. And a lot of people think that
in order to get beyond this problem we have
to accept a kind of impersonal ethics, some sort
of impersonal consequentialism or whatever. But there are lots
of possibilities here, but, um, these, these are really
difficult issues of moral theory that have been around
ever since uh Parfit published Reasons and Persons, and
we're still struggling with them. Population ethics is, I
think the most intractable and A difficult area in
The, the, the. AREA in which practical ethics and
theoretical ethics overlap. Um, So I'm interested in those
issues and then their implications for all kinds of
Issues in, in, in reproductive ethics.
So, uh, I mean this sort of links to
some of the questions we've already explored here, but
do you think that there are any instances where
there would be a moral duty for people to
reproduce?
Uh, YES, because I have the, uh, Anti-extinctionism view
that I have mentioned earlier, I, I don't use
that label, but uh because I believe that it
is really, really important to avoid human extinction. Uh,
IF there were circumstances in which there were a
serious threat of human extinction, extinction, then I think
that many people would have a moral duty to,
to try to keep the human population, uh, uh,
uh, in existence by having children. Um. There's also
this, uh, just. I don't know what to think
of this, but here, suppose that it's, suppose that
uh the the brand of weak pro-natalism that I
have been Uh, pushed by my own thinking into
accepting, which I didn't accept earlier, but it just
seems the arguments are dragging me in this way.
I think there is a moral reason to cause
a person to exist just because that person would
have a life that would be good for that
person. It's because I would be doing something that
would be conferring a benefit on this person. In
the same way that if I cause a miserable
person to exist, I would be causing, I would
be inflicting a harm on that person. Um, IF
that's true, then in, if there really is always
this moral reason. To cause a person to exist
if the person's life would be a really good
one. Um, THEN the question arises, wouldn't that reason
rise to the level of a duty if there
were no moral or prudential reasons not to do
it? So one could bring a child into existence
who would have a wonderful life. It wouldn't be
bad for oneself in any way to have this
child. There was no moral reason not to have
it. Would it then become a moral duty? I
tend to think so. I tend to think that
if there is a reason that is moral in
nature and completely unopposed by any other good reason.
Then that reason becomes one that one ought to
act on, and that's a way of saying it's
a duty. Now there are people who disagree with
this, there are people who think that, um, there
are moral reasons, that are positive moral reasons, but
they remain only permissions, they don't become duties. Um,
THERE are a number of people who believe that.
I just don't see the coherence of that. I
think if there's a moral reason, Then there's a
presumption that one should do it, and that presumption
has to be overridden or defeated to make it
permissible not to act on that reason, if it's
a genuinely moral reason. And I could easily be
wrong about that, but that's What I think at
the moment.
00, OK, but, but then let me ask you
this just to clarify this point specifically because I
think that uh it's plausible for us to say
that there are instances where for people to, um,
how should I put it, I, I have to
be careful with the wording here, but I mean,
When it comes to people reproducing, we talk a
lot about people's autonomy, that is for people to
decide whether or not they want to reproduce. Do
you think that a moral duty, at least in
certain extents, uh, instances, could override, uh, people's autonomy,
that morally speaking, uh, it would be. Uh, THE,
um, uh, the, the moral duty to reproduce would
be higher or could be higher than people's autonomy
and they're deciding not to reproduce just based on
their own autonomous choice.
Well, if The reason to reproduce rises to the
level of a moral duty. Then autonomy becomes irrelevant.
Um, MY being autonomous doesn't give me a permission.
Not to do what I ought to do morally.
OK. Autonomy functions in areas in which I don't
have any moral requirements.
Mhm.
So, yeah, I'm just saying individual autonomy doesn't, never
overrides morality.
Oh, OK, but, um, OK, then let me ask
you another question. Do you think that there are
any instances where If moral duty overrides, and I
mean we're assuming here, of course, if we call
it a moral duty, as you said, it overrides
autonomy, but um I mean in those instances, do
you think that there would be any justification to
coerce people into reproducing if necessary or not?
Only in extreme circumstances. Um, AS I mentioned, suppose
that, uh, We were genuinely threatened with human extinction,
and it is very important that the remaining people.
You know, this could be after some sort of
nuclear holocaust or something of that sort, um. The
probability of extinction is quite high and the only
chance of avoiding human extinction is for those people
who remain to, um, reproduce as vigorously, as vigorously
as they possibly can. In those circumstances, yes, I
think that it would, you know, however this is
going to be done, I don't know how you
coerce people to have sex, but, um, uh, it,
it does seem to me that coercion would be
permissible. In a lot of other cases though, what
we think is that most, most There are, there
are, there are very many duties that people have
that we don't think. They should be coerced to
fulfill. Certainly not by the state and perhaps not
even by people close to them. Um.
No, I, I, I, I mean
reproduction, if it, if it is ever a duty,
very likely one of those. Again, because the coercion
would be so intrusive.
Mhm. No, I, I, um, I also, I mean,
that came to my mind also because You know,
we hear from many women, and I think this
is very unfortunate, at least in my view, many
women, and this is brought to the table, um,
particularly by feminists that I mean, they felt coerced
by society, at least to a certain extent, coerced
in terms of being feeling socially pressured into reproducing
by, I don't know, their family, their friends, society
more broadly, and then some of them, this has
been studied, regret. Having children, regret reproducing, uh, I
mean, uh, do, do you, would you consider those
kinds of, um, social phenomena like Um actually society
trying to Even if, even if we don't use
the verb force here for forcing women to reproduce,
but trying to push them as much as possible
into reproducing, uh, do you look at that as
a form of coercion or not? Well,
whatever it is, pressuring women to have children seems
to me to be wrong, um. And that is
because even if there is a moral reason, To
cause a person to exist if that person's life
would be worth living. As I said earlier, that
reason may well be overridden by prudential reasons as
well as by moral reasons. There may be a
moral reason why a person shouldn't reproduce, but there
are also prudential reasons that uh weigh against whatever
moral reason there is. And uh It seems to
me that in general these prudential reasons are going
to be decisive, at least in the world as
it is now, um, maybe not after a nuclear
holocaust or something of that sort or an asteroid
hits the earth, but, um, Yeah, I, I, I
do think that prudential reasons can defeat whatever the
moral reason is, and Social efforts to pressure women
into having children are, are pernicious and wrong. And
of course they do, they, they, they still occur
in many societies where women have this very subordinate
position, um.
And I, and I guess that I don't know
if you agree with me, but that social pressure
also manifests. I mean, in this particular case, it
is actually political pressure, but it also manifests politically
when, for example, in the United States Roe v.
Wade was overturned and now Um, in most states,
if I, if, if I'm correct about that, uh,
abortion is considered illegal and so women no longer
have at least legal access to abortion and there's
also different ways that the Trump administration is trying
to. I mean, make it more difficult for women
to access contraception, for people to have access to
sexual education and other things like that. I mean
that that would also be, or you would also
consider that a form of coercion in this case,
political or not,
yeah, yeah. Everything that the Trump administration is doing
in the United States is detestable and appalling, and
uh this court that he has stacked with Uh,
these conservative justices, uh, In overturning Roe versus Wade
has done something again really appalling. Now it does
that, what that does is it removes the constitutional
protection and the right to have an abortion at
the federal level. It's still possible for states to
make abortion permissible, but what that judgment did was
to make it possible for states to impose all
kinds of restrictions on access to abortion, and that
is, uh, badly harming all sorts of women, particularly
those who can't uh afford to travel to a
state in which they could get uh an abortion.
So yes, this is Uh, you know, the most
awful violation of the rights and autonomy of women
and others in the, in the United States. Yeah.
OK, so I have one last question then, which
is, uh, I, I, I think it's actually the
opposite of my previous question when I asked you
about uh potential moral duty for people to reproduce.
I, in cases where there might be overpopulation, and
I think that there's a good case to be
made scientifically that We actually have, uh, overpopulation, uh,
uh, uh, yeah, and I mean, the, the world
pop uh, the global population is still increasing and
it will reach potentially 9, 10 billion people at
least. So, do you think that, uh, particularly when
there are So many people out there that that
can have a negative impact on the environment, on
resources, and even with climate change on the future
of our species, that there should be a moral
duty to not reproduce.
I can certainly imagine circumstances in which there would
be a moral duty not to have children or
to limit one's children to perhaps one, something of
that sort. Uh, But we'd need to, we'd need
to have a criterion for determining what counts as
overpopulation. And you've, you've offered some. On the other
hand, There are, there are ways of Overcoming the
problems that we attribute to overpopulation, that wouldn't necessarily
involve limiting the number of people on the planet,
we could have done So much to avoid climate
change, and we still could, though every day it
gets more and more. Uh, UNAVOIDABLE. But then we
have, you know, these people like the people who
support Trump, who believe the lie that climate change
is a hoax or a fraud or, you know,
whatever ridiculous terms that Trump and his Billionaire pals,
uh, use, um. You know In many ways it's
not the number of people, it's those who Control
things through their great wealth who are making the
problems so, so terrible. Um, AND we could do
the same thing with agriculture, you know, we could
have agriculture that, uh, was much more sustainable if
more people were vegetarian or vegan than they are
now, we could have, uh, we could feed more
people, people could be healthier, and so on. All
this could be done. Um, THROUGH other means. I,
I mean, actually, if we think about it, just
the enormous amount of food we waste each year
would probably be enough to feed everyone in the
world.
Yeah, I, I forget what the figure I saw,
but Americans, Americans throw out something like 50% of
the food that they buy that goes in there,
goes in the bin.
No, that, that's, that's ridiculous. It's, it's absurd.
Yeah, I, I, yeah, sorry, I, I think every,
every sensitive person is feeling this, but you know,
the world just seems to be crashing into barbarism
in, in every way, it just, uh, you know,
everybody I know just wakes up depressed in the
morning to see what's happening, you know, what these,
what these leaders. Who in some cases are elected
like Trump and Netanyahu are doing to the world,
it's just unspeakable.
Yeah, yeah, sorry for going off on a tangent,
but going back to overpopulation then. Uh, SO, uh,
do you think, uh, which kinds of circumstances then
do you think, uh, would entail, uh, a duty
to not reproduce?
Uh, uh, WELL, as you mentioned, you know, climate
catastrophe, radical shortage of resources, so when people are
starving, and there's no other way to try to
prevent this from continuing to happen in the future
except through reducing the size of the global population,
then I think individuals have, would have a duty,
uh, to limit reproduction, um, but I also think
they would have an even more important duty to
Uh, limit their use of resources, to use resources
in the, in the, in, in an acceptable way
to do whatever they could in their very tiny
way to avoid contributing to these problems. So I
think, um, limiting uh uh reproduction is a kind
of last resort. It would be better to solve
these problems in other ways. Restricting procreation is terrible
for people who would really like to have children
or more than one child. It's a, that is
a genuine deprivation for people. Much easier for people
to, you know, to, to, to use resources more
efficiently or Uh, whatever. Mhm. So it's, I think
of it as a kind of last resort for
addressing the problems that we, we put under the
label of overpopulation.
Mhm. Yeah, I think that's a fair point. So
Jeff, I would love to be here for another
3 hours with you because there are always more
topics that I would like to discuss with you,
and your work is really fascinating, but we've already
done almost 1 hour and 40 minutes, so people
will Also get a bit tighter with us. So,
um, let's wrap up our conversation here. And as
always, thank you very much for coming on the
show and I will be looking forward to our
future next conversation, which I imagine will, will happen.
So thank you so much. Doing this. Thank you
for your work and it's always a big pleasure
to everyone.
Well, thank you, Ricardo. Again, as I said at
the beginning, it just amazes me, given the breadth
of your understanding and the incredible diversity of the
people you interview that you are able to understand.
Issues that I spend my whole life, you know,
this tiny little set of issues that I spent
all my time thinking about, and you seem to
be able to grasp all of this, understand it
well, and pose challenging questions on it. I, I'm
just, uh, in, in awe of your abilities, so
it's an honor to be on your show. Thank
you.
Well, thank you, thank you for the kind words.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sanny
Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.